projects/index.md, before:

---
layout: page
title: My Projects
permalink: /projects/
---

*My game mods and other modding--related projects are listed separately [here](/projects/mods/).*

### Current Projects

I'm currently working on [LOOT](https://loot.github.io) and the Royal Deeside Railway Preservation Society's [website](http://rdrps.org.uk), and contributing to [yaml-cpp](https://github.com/jbeder/yaml-cpp).

### Miscellaneous

Here are a few things I wrote because I needed them, and shared because other people may need them too.

#### [Jed Gettext Parser](https://github.com/WrinklyNinja/jed-gettext-parser)

A Javascript Gettext MO file parser that outputs [Jed](https://slexaxton.github.io/Jed/)-compatible data, and which can be run in browser and Node environments.

#### [MARS](http://github.com/WrinklyNinja/mars)

<div class="table-row">
    <img alt="MARS icon" src="/images/MARS.svg"><p>An interface for the Agilent B2900A Precision SMU that allows the automated testing of devices over time.<br>

    So named because <a href="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Curiosity_(rover)">Curiosity</a> landed as I wrote it.</p>
</div>

Commit message:

Added Pseudosem to projects page.

projects/index.md, after:

---
layout: page
title: My Projects
permalink: /projects/
---

*My game mods and other modding--related projects are listed separately [here](/projects/mods/).*

### Current Projects

I'm currently working on [LOOT](https://loot.github.io) and the Royal Deeside Railway Preservation Society's [website](http://rdrps.org.uk), and contributing to [yaml-cpp](https://github.com/jbeder/yaml-cpp).

### Miscellaneous

Here are a few things I wrote because I needed them, and shared because other people may need them too.

#### [Pseudosem](https://github.com/WrinklyNinja/pseudosem)

A C++11 header-only library for comparison of version strings, following the [Semantic Versioning](http://semver.org) specification and featuring support for a wider variety of version syntaxes.

#### [Jed Gettext Parser](https://github.com/WrinklyNinja/jed-gettext-parser)

A Javascript Gettext MO file parser that outputs [Jed](https://slexaxton.github.io/Jed/)-compatible data, and which can be run in browser and Node environments.

#### [MARS](http://github.com/WrinklyNinja/mars)

<div class="table-row">
    <img alt="MARS icon" src="/images/MARS.svg"><p>An interface for the Agilent B2900A Precision SMU that allows the automated testing of devices over time.<br>

    So named because <a href="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Curiosity_(rover)">Curiosity</a> landed as I wrote it.</p>
</div>
