content/about/index.md, before:

---
title: About
---

### Me

<img class="portrait" alt="my avatar" src="images/me.png">
<small class="portrait">Please don't try this at home.</small>

I like to solve problems with code, and building things to learn new stuff. Most
of my open-source code is written in C++ and JavaScript, but these days I
generally prefer Rust and TypeScript. I don't write enough Python. At work I
mostly write Java and JavaScript, with a bit of Go and Python.

I've also made or helped make a number of mods for The Elder Scrolls IV:
Oblivion, and written some articles about modding on Oblivion, Skyrim, Fallout 3
and Fallout: New Vegas, some of which can be found here.

*Ortham* is my pseudonym on GitHub, but I've tended to go by *WrinklyNinja*
elsewhere, particularly within the Elder Scrolls modding community. I got the
latter name from the last line of
[this](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=V2jDTufS5WY) Orange advert. It's not a
great ad, but for some reason the last two words stuck in my head long after I'd
totally forgotten about the rest of it. My avatar is Dan McNinja, from *The
Adventures of Dr. McNinja*. I can't remember why he has
knives taped to his face, but it's a suitably silly image that Chris Hastings
was gracious enough to let me use.

When I'm not writing code, I like to chip away at the vast backlog of games that
starts with my Steam library and listen to music. I also enjoy travelling and
taking way too many pictures on my trips, but I'm terrible at getting around to
organising them, so I don't do it enough.

### This Site

This site is generated using [Hugo](https://gohugo.io/), uses the
[Ananke](https://github.com/theNewDynamic/gohugo-theme-ananke) theme, and is
hosted on [GitHub](https://github.com/Ortham/Ortham.github.io). It's
where I put anything that's probably too long to make a forum post, so is mostly
related to the software projects I work on.

Site content is copyright Oliver Hamlet under the [CC BY-NC-SA 4.0](https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-sa/4.0/) license.

Commit message:

Switch theme to Congo
The theme has a dark mode, so JS has been added to initialise Mermaid diagrams with the correct theme and to support dynamic updates when the page changes between light and dark modes.

content/about/index.md, after:

---
title: About
params:
    showPagination: false
---

### Me

<img class="portrait" alt="my avatar" src="images/me.png">
<small class="portrait">Please don't try this at home.</small>

I like to solve problems with code, and building things to learn new stuff. Most
of my open-source code is written in C++ and JavaScript, but these days I
generally prefer Rust and TypeScript. I don't write enough Python. At work I
mostly write Java and JavaScript, with a bit of Go and Python.

I've also made or helped make a number of mods for The Elder Scrolls IV:
Oblivion, and written some articles about modding on Oblivion, Skyrim, Fallout 3
and Fallout: New Vegas, some of which can be found here.

*Ortham* is my pseudonym on GitHub, but I've tended to go by *WrinklyNinja*
elsewhere, particularly within the Elder Scrolls modding community. I got the
latter name from the last line of
[this](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=V2jDTufS5WY) Orange advert. It's not a
great ad, but for some reason the last two words stuck in my head long after I'd
totally forgotten about the rest of it. My avatar is Dan McNinja, from *The
Adventures of Dr. McNinja*. I can't remember why he has
knives taped to his face, but it's a suitably silly image that Chris Hastings
was gracious enough to let me use.

When I'm not writing code, I like to chip away at the vast backlog of games that
starts with my Steam library and listen to music. I also enjoy travelling and
taking way too many pictures on my trips, but I'm terrible at getting around to
organising them, so I don't do it enough.

### This Site

This site is generated using [Hugo](https://gohugo.io/), uses the
[Congo](https://github.com/jpanther/congo) theme, and is
hosted on [GitHub](https://github.com/Ortham/Ortham.github.io). It's
where I put anything that's probably too long to make a forum post, so is mostly
related to the software projects I work on.

Site content is copyright Oliver Hamlet under the [CC BY-NC-SA 4.0](https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-sa/4.0/) license.
