---
title:  "It lives!"
date:   2018-10-09
summary: Site overhauled, updates to come.
---

It's been a while, I'd almost forgotten that I had a blog. I recently wrote a
forum post giving a kind of status update for LOOT, and realised that I had
quite a lot to write about for that month or so of progress, let alone the last
few years. As such, I've decided to resurrect this site and write about some of
what I've been doing, what I'm interested in these days, and where I see my
projects heading.

I say 'resurrection', though this site wasn't offline or broken or anything like
that, as I've taken advantage of relatively new support for third-party themes
in Jekyll and GitHub Pages to completely rebuild it. I was previously using
[Pixyll](https://github.com/johno/pixyll) as the site's foundation, and though I
think it looked pretty good, using it did involve having all of Pixyll's code
sitting in my own source tree, and updating it involved pulling and merging
changes from the upstream Pixyll repository, which made managing the site a bit
messy. Instead, Jekyll now allows you to declare something like Pixyll as a
theme you depend on, and Jekyll will merge your content on top of the theme's,
so you can keep your content separate from the files of the theme you use.

Unfortunately, Pixyll hasn't been updated to support being used as a
third-party theme like that, so I had a hunt around for an alternative, and
settled on [Minimal Mistakes](https://mmistakes.github.io/minimal-mistakes)
because it looked reasonably good by default and was well documented and
supported. I'll probably tweak it more over time, but I didn't want to spend
time faffing around with the site's looks, I'd rather get straight to the
content.

## Setting Up

The setup process was pretty smooth, I:

1. created a new, independent branch in my git repository with `git checkout --orphan new-site`
2. ran `jekyll new .` and committed what it created,
3. added the Jekyll config that GitHub Pages uses so that testing the site
   locally would be more accurate,
4. cherry-picked all my content commits from the old site's `master` branch,
   making a note of anything that couldn't be preserved because it was too
   Pixyll-specific,
5. switched the theme to Minimal Mistakes, from the default Jekyll theme,
6. reintroduced all the bits that were left out when cherry-picking,
7. did a bit of refactoring to tidy things up.

One thing I will note is that my `_config.yml` didn't have

```yaml
repository: WrinklyNinja/wrinklyninja.github.io
```

in it, and this caused an error whenever I ran `bundle exec jekyll serve`:

```
 Incremental build: disabled. Enable with --incremental
      Generating...
      Remote Theme: Using theme mmistakes/minimal-mistakes
  Liquid Exception: No repo name found. Specify using PAGES_REPO_NWO environment variables, 'repository' in your configuration, or set up an 'origin' git remote pointing to your github.com repository. in /_layouts/default.html
             ERROR: YOUR SITE COULD NOT BE BUILT:
                    ------------------------------------
                    No repo name found. Specify using PAGES_REPO_NWO environment variables, 'repository' in your configuration, or set up an 'origin' git remote pointing to your github.com repository.
```

I didn't really understand the error at first, because I do have an `origin` Git
remote set up correctly, and needing `repository` set wasn't mentioned in the
otherwise pretty good installation guide, though it is mentioned as an aside
deeper in the documentation.

At the end of the process, I was left with about 50 commits that preserved the
history of my blog's content and switched to the new theme. The context of that
history is lost, but I think it was worth it to eliminate ~ 430 commits of
Pixyll repository history that were previously cluttering the repository.

## What's Changed?

Aside from the site's theme, I've dropped a few links:

- The Bitcoin donation link is gone. I got out after the madness of last year's
  hype bubble and its enduring inflation of graphics card prices, not to mention
  the environmental impact of people building server farms to mine
  cryptocurrency and burning huge amounts of electricity to generate 'money'
  that's *really hard* to spend. I wish I could say I made even a small fortune
  in the process, but I didn't end up selling until well after the bubble burst.

  The [/bitcoin](/bitcoin) page is still up because that's linked to by old
  versions of LOOT (I took the link out of LOOT a while ago now), but I've
  updated the page to instead discourage people from sending me bitcoin (not that
  that's really necessary :laughing:).

  So, if you want to show appreciation for what I do via your wallet, PayPal's
  how to do it. If that doesn't work for you, an email saying something nice is
  *at least* as effective, and my address is at the bottom of the page.
- The link to my Twitter account is gone because I never use it, so anyone who
  wants to follow me there is going to get pretty bored pretty quickly, and
  attempting to contact me there is equally pointless.
- The link to my LinkedIn account is gone for the same reason as my Twitter
  account, though I theoretically have an incentive to use the platform and keep
  it up to date, so it might come back if I do get around to updating my
  profile...

The switch to the new theme also brought with it better support for tables of
contents, so the Environment Mod List post is now benefiting from that.

So, with the obligatory "how I built my blog" post out of the way, I'd better
get started on my next post!
